All right,
welcome this is the introduction to rust.
So we have some instructions
on here on the slide,
in this repo,
that will help you get set up.
So this is things like how to install
rust, how to find the companion website
for this, and also the slides for
this workshop.
We're gonna start with a little
introduction before we get into the actual
course material.
So, this is gonna give you a little
bit of background, like what is Rust?
Who uses Rust?
Why and
why not you might want to use Rust?
And the workshop structure.
So, this is from
the rust-lang.org website,
this is sort of how Rust self describes.
It's a language empowering everyone to
build reliable and efficient software.
So, both of those two
words are highlighted, and
they're both important as we're gonna see.
So rust is a language that compiles
to either machine code which would
mean like a binary executable.
So like a.xc on Windows or
just a binary executable on Mac or
Linux or to webassembly,
which will let you run it in the browser.
Who uses Rust, all sorts of people,
all sorts of organisations.
Mozilla is probably the most well known
because they were sort of bankrolling rust
development for the first like decade or
so of its life.
They use it in Firefox to power some of
their new rendering stuff that's been
a lot faster than what they had before.
Microsoft has started using rust in a big
way they are apparently rewriting some of
the core like low level
windows things in rust.
I don't know if that means they're going
to rewrite all of windows in rust that
seems unlikely but it is powerful
enough that you can use it for
really low level operating system stuff.
And Microsoft has joined the rust
foundation as like one of the most
prominent members.
Dropbox has been using rough stuff
to improve some of the performance
on some of their sinking stuff.
There's also sort of lesser
known organizations talk for
example is using rust to make
an embedded systems operating system.
Debbie makes makes a game engine in Rust
Redux is actually a full blown desktop
operating system written entirely in Rust.
You can find more examples
of this on the Rust website.
So you can see there's a lot of
diversity in how rust is used.
It's used by really big companies,
really small companies,
not organizations that are not companies,
all sorts of different examples.
So what can I build with rust
you might be asking yourself.
One of the obvious things for an audience
in front end masters is web servers.
Like you got a front end and
usually you need a back end to go with it.
You can absolutely build
a web server in Rust.
You can also build
command line interfaces.
This is something that comes up if you're
doing tooling like build tooling stuff to
compile your front end.
Also, you can use it to build the front
end of a native desktop application.
Maybe you don't want to use electron,
you'd rather use something else that's
maybe a little bit higher performance.
Rust is absolutely something you can
use to build native desktop apps.
Also, you can just actually use it for
web front ends to via webAssembly.
Now granted, that's not JavaScript.
So if you need to target older browsers,
that's not necessarily gonna work.
But it is something that you can do.
A really powerful example
of this is makepad.dev.
I recommend bringing this up on your
phone because it's an example of
really like what how powerful rust can be
when it comes to making in browser UI.
Makepad is a fully featured IDE that runs
like 60 frames per second on your phone,
and it's all built with rust.
So check that out if you have an example
of what rust can do in the browser.
Also, you might want to use it for
just performance intensive libraries that
could be in any one of these applications.
Like web servers, CLIs,
Native apps or even in browser apps,
because again, rust is a really,
really good at performance.
And finally, like we saw on the previous
slide on operating systems.
if you really want to build your own
operating system that is, believe it or
not something you can do in rust.
So why would you choose to use rest?
These are some of the things that can do.
Why would you choose it over some of the
other ways you might build those things.
I'm gonna give you three reasons speed
performance and going real fast.
These are really
the selling points of Rust.
You'll notice the theme here.
This is really like in my mind the reason
to use rust over any other like back end
technology.
Or any other front end technologies
that you might get Is rust unlocks
like basically the maximum speed you
can possibly get out of your hardware.
So historically like languages that
give you really great performance.
Are actually really old languages like
C is still one of the most widely used
languages in the world.
Because it gets you such
strong performance.
So you came out in 1972, and its whole big
deal is that it's basically efficient.
C's sort of claim to fame is being known
as, quote portable assembly language.
In other words, it's about as
low level as assembly language.
It has a few conveniences, but
it gives you like complete
control of your hardware.
So there's really basically no
overhead between your C program and
the hardware underneath it.
C++ from 1985 also one of the most popular
high performance languages out there.
Still one of the most widely
used languages today.
And again, the main reason is
because it's very efficient.
One of C++ his goals was to introduce
object oriented programming to C.
So that you could have those constructs
as a convenience for the programmer,
while still maintaining the same level
of efficiency and performance as C.
In other words, having no or as little
as possible between you and the end.
What the heck Hardware is capable of.
And it's not until 2010 that we get
something that really can be considered
a serious challenger.
To the the sort of the throne of C and C++
that have been at the top of the heap for
so long, which is rust.
Rust again very, very efficient, almost
nothing between a compiled Rust programme
and what the hardware is capable of.
But rather than going in the object
oriented direction like C++ did because
rust is not an object oriented language.
Rust said, what, we just want to be
reliable, efficient and ergonomic and
that's kind of the whole goal of rust.
I know ergonomic is not one of the words
that they use to describe themselves.
They just focus on efficient and reliable.
But I would say compared
to both of these things,
not only is rust a lot more reliable, it's
also a lot more ergonomic than C or C++.
Okay, so
here's a concrete example of this.
Here's an error that you would get in
from the Rust compiler, if you had,
let's say a typo.
It says no field 'emial' on type
'User' because I misspelled email.
It says, note: available fields
are: 'name' and 'email'.
Now contrast this to
the same error in C++.
This is what you get, main.cpp error,
no member named, 'emial' in 'User'.
And that's about it doesn't really
show you the line number or
hint like what are some of the available
fields, maybe you have a typo there.
So this is a pretty big improvement and
you can sort of extrapolate this.
To more complicated areas like type
mismatches and things like that.
It's just generally a much friendlier
experience than you would get from
something like C or C++,
even modern C and C++ compilers.
Now granted, I'm not gonna say that rust
is like the most ergonomic language that
I've ever used with the nicest in terms
of compiler errors, that would be elm.
So here's what it is when Rust in the same
era in elm would be, something like this.
The user record does not
have an email field.
This is usually a typo here are the user
fields that are most similar so
maybe email should be email.
If you've ever used elm before,
I teach a course on it right
here on Frontend Masters.
And it's really the most delightful
language I've ever used.
But again, we're not trying to compare
Rust, at least in my mind, to really high
level languages like elm that are sort
of designed around ergonomics and
delightfulness.
What we're comparing it to is
languages that have that same level of
efficiency like C.
And C++ because that's where rust really
shines is when you want that level of
performance.
And when you're up at
that tier of performance,
like Rust is just leaps and leaps.
And bounds ahead of the competition
as far as I'm concerned.
Okay, so why use rust?
To sum up I would say you can get C and
C++ levels of performance.
But with nice ergonomics,
a language server,
we're gonna actually see that
when we do the exercises.
Automatic memory management
package manager code for matter.
More compiler help with concurrency
not something we're gonna get into in
this course.
But something to know about rust is
it's really good with concurrency.
Also lots of compiler help for
really big code bases like you can
make changes to a big Rust code base.
And still have a lot of
confidence that once it compiles,
it's probably just going to work again.
Okay, so
those are some of the reasons to use Rust.
Let's talk about some of the reasons
why you might not choose rust.
Number one rust is a big
language there's lots to learn.
This is an introductory course so
we're definitely not going to
get into the entire language.
By the end of this course you should have
a good understanding of like the basic
concepts of rust.
And the for
the things that you would need to learn to
build like a full featured huge Rust app.
They're out there.
There's plenty of stuff there.
But you should at least not have any
trouble learning those things from here.
If as long as you've gotten a handle on
the things we talked about today, but
there is a lot more out there.
Really, even though this is a full day
workshop, this is kind of just the tip of
the iceberg of what's there and
the entire language.
There's just a lot to learn.
It has a smaller ecosystem than
something like C or C++ there has been,
CNC plus plus being written since 1972,
in the case of C in 1985.
since, in the case of C++ there's just
way more CNC plus plus code out there in
the world.
Now granted, rust does have an FFI,
which is a foreign function interface,
which is a way that you can call C and
C plus code C and C++ code from rust.
But as soon as you do that you start
to lose out on some of our safety and
reliability guarantees and
the economics get worse.
So it's something you can
do as a fallback, but
it's generally something that you
want to avoid if at all possible.
Much nicer to have everything in Rust
which is why you see projects like let's
build a whole operating system in Rust,
things like that.
Also I would say that rust has a slower
iteration cycle than most languages.
Now I'm not saying slower
than let's say C++ but
I am saying like languages in general.
I'm very spoiled as an elm programmer
because the Elm compiler is very,
very fast.
The rust compiler,
let's say is not so much.
But one of the reasons is, is not
necessarily the speed of the compiler,
just the strictness of the compiler.
Rust is very much a language that sort
of helps you build reliable software.
By telling you when there
are problems with it,
not by sort of like
papering over problems.
So there's a lot of cases where the rust
compiler will give you errors that
you might not see in any other language.
These are called borrow checker errors and
we'll talk about them
later on in the course.
Especially as a beginner, the satisfying
the borrow checker can feel like
an experience of fighting
the borrow checker.
Because this is new category of
errors that you've never seen before.
I definitely remember when I was a rusted
beginner encountering this feeling of
working through the borrow checker errors.
And seeing like, I see that it's
telling me there's a problem, but
I don't understand what it's
trying to communicate to me.
So over the course of this course,
you're gonna see that we
are going to build up ways.
To talk about memory in order to give you
a mental model of what the borrow checker
is actually doing.
And hopefully by the end of the course,
you'll have an understanding of like.
I see why it's giving me this error
because I know what it's trying to do and
the problem is that
it's trying to prevent.
Also, especially when you're doing a full
build as opposed to like an incremental
build, the rust compiler
is just pretty slow.
I wish I could say that there was sort
of hope that it was going to get faster.
But after reading some blog posts from
some of the people who were closely
involved in the development
of the rust compiler.
Think it's sort of safe to assume
that that's not going to get better
anytime soon.
Maybe not ever, it might just be a
language that always has a slow compiler.
I think that might just be
a downside of the language.
But nevertheless, it's got plenty
of upsides to compensate for that.
In particular tests can take a while
to build, like integration tests and
things like that.
They just take longer to
build than I would like.
And I think that's going to be
the case somewhat indefinitely.
Finally, although rust is definitely safer
and more reliable than something like C++.
Which is what it's competing with,
if you don't need that level of
performance that Rust offers.
Like that C and C++ level where you might
want to build a game engine out of it or
something like really high powered
It's not as safe as something like
a pure functional programming language.
Again like elm or there's a number of
other languages out there that basically
have even more safety
guarantees than Rust,
at the expense of not being
as fast to run as rust.
So that's why I said at the beginning like
really the reason to use rust is if you
really want to,
you really want to go fast.
You want to have that like
top tier of performance.
And there are some downsides
that come with that.
But as far as I'm concerned if
you want to be in that tier,
I can't think of anything I
would rather use then rust.
For most things, shout out to
Zig Zig programming language is
another thing that you
might wanna consider.
But it's a lot newer than rust.
And not nearly as many people
are using it, at least at this point.
>> What makes us compiler
slow specifically?
>> Great question so what makes
the Russ compiler slow honestly,
there's not one particular thing.
There's a number of design decisions, some
of which are in the name of performance.
Others of which are just that happened
to be the way that they designed it.
I wish I had a link handy for
the blog post, but
I guess there's not one
short succinct answer to it.
There's a guy who used to work on the Rust
compiler that did sort of a deep dive into
like why is Rust slow or
like why isn't Rust fast to compile.
Because of course the programs generates
very fast or can be very fast.
But I don't have that link handy
offhand so I wish I had a quick answer.
But it's a bunch of things,
it's not just one thing.
So putting these things together,
we have some pros.
We have some cons,
like how does rust sort of stack up
against other languages that people use?
Well, one way you might evaluate this
is stack overflow every year runs
this survey.
And they ask people what they think
about the language they're using.
Like what do they like about him
when they dislike how much do
they like them overall.
And one of the categories they have at
the end of the survey is what is the most
loved programming language.
And in 2016 that was Rust was
considered the most loved programming
language on Stack Overflow.
Out of all the languages that people
were using on Stack Overflow.
In 2017, it was also Rust, also in 2018,
also in 2019, and also in 2020.
So basically the the past five years
that they've been running the survey.
Rust has been considered the most
loved programming language by whatever
survey methodology they're using.
Now, does that mean that rust is the most
loved programming language in the world?
No, but it does mean there at least
are a lot of people on stack overflow who
are answering that survey.
Who seem to think that It's a really
nice programming language and
is meeting your needs really well.
So hopefully by the end of this course,
you'll be able to evaluate for
yourself whether it's a language
that is going to meet your needs.
Okay, so to recap, we started off talking
about what is Rust who uses Rust, why and
why not.
You might use rust and
the overall workshop structure